the irish cinderlad

In Ireland, in the old times, there lived a lad named Becan. His mother gave him 
this name the day he was born, for Becan is Irish for Little One. It's fitting, 
said she, for such a wee thing. His mother loved him all the same and carried Becan 
about in her egg basket for safekeeping. Whenever he opened his mouth, she spooned 
milk porridge into it, and Becan began to grow. Red hair flamed on his head. His 
skinny legs got rounder, and his tiny feet got longer until his toes poked out of 
the basket. Although the rest of him stayed small, his feet kept on growing. 
By the time Becan was thirteen years old, they we still so large he'd splash a 
puddle dry by stepping in it. Still, Becan's worries were few enough until his 
mother died.

His father was a peddler and often away, selling needles and pins and bringing back 
whatever was needed. To Becan's astonishment, one evening he came home with a new 
wife and her three nearly grown daughters. Now you've a mam again, and three big 
sisters besides, to watch out for you, his father explained. Watch they did. 
All three sisters spied on him, and if anything went amiss, they shrieked, 
Blame Little Bigfoot for that is what they called him. We'd be better off without 
that good-for-nothing boy said their mother. At last she told Becan, Your big feet 
are always in the way! It's time you went off to tend to the cows. Cows are fine 
company, Becan replied, but I've heard talk of a mean speckled bull. 
A kick from him can send a man sailing over the rainbow. Stop fretting snapped his 
stepmother. Not even a cow could mistake you for a man. 

So Becan became a herdboy. Each day at sunup, he led his father's three cows up the 
hill to graze on purple clover. At sundown, he brought them home again. In between, 
he sat under an oak tree and kept a sharp eye out for the speckled bull. One misty 
morning, Becan heard a bellow louder than a thunderclap. Rocks rattled down the 
hill, cows galloped about in circles, and Becan scampered up the oak tree. 
When he dared to look, it was right into the angry eyes of an enormous bull. 
The creature's face was white, but splashed with rusty red like freckles on Becan's 
nose. The hoofs were big and broad like Becan's feet. He twitched his long tail and 
pawed the ground, ready to knock down the tree and the boy with it. Quickly, Becan 
stretched out his hand and scratched him behind the ear, in the place that cows 
like best. We could be cousins you and I, said Becan, jumping down, for we look to 
be patched together from the same odds and ends. The bull lowered his head with the 
wicked curved horns. But instead of tossing Becan, he nuzzled his cheek. From that 
moment, the bull and the boy were fast friends. Becan told of his troubles, while 
the speckled bull listed, chewing thoughtfully.

The sisters tattle, said Becan one day. The stepmother scolds. I'm fed only scraps 
and will soon shrink down to nothing. Not while I am about, rumbled the bull. Look 
into my left ear and pull out what you find there. Becan wasn't surprised to hear 
the bull talk, for he had begun to suspect that his friend was no ordinary animal. 
Seeing something white poking from the animal's ear, Becan tugged on it. Out came a 
tablecloth, and wrapped inside it was a whole meal. There was bread and cheese and 
sausage. There were boiled turnips, a partridge pie, and oaten cakes, sticky with 
honey. Eat what you will, said the speckled bull. Becan ate every crumb and licked 
his fingers clean. Then he rolled up the cloth and tucked it back into the bull's 
ear.

Each day thereafter, Becan had a noontime meal fit for a chieftain. Each evening, 
he turned down the crust of bread his stepmother set out for his supper. That boy's 
filling his stomach some way, the woman told her oldest daughter. Tomorrow,
yourself up to the pasture and find out how. The girl did just that, hiding behind 
a bush to watch Becan while he watched the cows. 

At midday, the speckled bull arrived. She saw Becan pat him, put a hand to his ear, 
and pull out a feast. The bull is feeding Becan, she whispered to her mother that 
night. I saw it. Then we shall butcher that old speckled bull declared the mother. 
He'll make a grand stew for us. Eyes closed, Becan nodded on the hearth. But his 
ears were open, and he heard every word that was said. At the first light of day, 
he ran to warn his friend

The bull snorted I'll not end in a soup pot! Get on my back, lad, and we'll soon be 
gone from here. With Becan holding tight to his horns, the bull trotted up the 
hill, over a steep mountain, and through a wood of beech trees. In a meadow, many 
days from home, the bull stopped. Here we bid good-bye, he said. For it is here 
that the gray bull and I must fight. No! Becan threw his arms around the bull's 
neck. The gray bull shall kill me, for my fate has been foretold. When I am dead, 
you are to twist off my tail. Becan stared at him in horror. Never Wear my tail as 
a belt. Use it when you need my help the most. The bull nudged Becan gently Do as I 
say

Early the next morning a bull gray as the sky overhead came charging through the 
trees. The two bulls locked horns and fought throughout the rainy day. When evening 
came the gray bull had disappeared and the speckled bull lay dead. Becan sat beside 
his friend all night. At dawn, remembering the bull's words, he cautiously twisted 
his tail. It spun around in a full circle and came off at once. Becan wrapped the 
tail twice about his waist and then, for the last time, reached into the animal's 
ear. He pulled out the tablecloth now bare of food and fresh as new and carefully 
covered the bull. he whispered, slan which is the Irish word for good-bye.

Alone, Becan continued his journey, walking down a rocky ridge and into a valley. 
The stones cut his bare feet, and he was grateful when a gentleman on horseback 
offered him a ride. Where are you bound, lad? the man asked Becan shrugged. 
I'm going anywhere at all. You could come along with me, the gentleman suggested. I 
am in want of a cowherd. Herding is what I do best, answered Becan. I've this horse 
three cows four sheep and a donkey and all of them good-natured. What's 
bad-tempered is on the other side of my wall an arhach. A giant! Becan exclaimed. 
I'd like to see one. Take warning. The gentleman waggled his finger. My last 
herdboy, a lad far bigger and stronger than you Although he knew quite well what 
was meant, Becan said at once, I'll have the job anyway, if it please 
you.

Becan became a herder again, sleeping in a cowshed by night and taking the horse, 
the cows, the sheep, and the donkey out to graze by day When they had chomped and 
chewed up everything in the gentleman's field, Becan climbed the stone wall to see 
what grew on the other side. Before him spread acres of grassy meadows and orchards 
of apple trees bowed with fruit. Becan knocked stones from the wall until it was 
low enough for the animals to step over. Help yourselves, he told them. That arhach 
has so much, he won't mind sharing. Then Becan climbed a tree to pick an apple for 
himself. Got you! a voice bellowed.

A sword slashed through the tree, chopping limbs into kindling and sending Becan 
tumbling to the ground. Hardly a bite on your bones. A huge and hideous giant poked 
Becan with the sword. But a bite is better than nothing. Becan's teeth began to 
chatter. The rest of him was too frightened to move. Then he remembered the 
speckled bull's last words. He pulled off his belt and flung it at the giant. As if 
it were alive, the bull's tail coiled like a snake about the giant's neck. The 
giant dropped his sword. Call it off! he croaked. Not ever! vowed Becan. Not his 
eye fell on the giant's shiny buckled boots until you give me those boots. The 
giant glared at Becan, but he kicked off his boots. Now, be gone and never come 
back! Becan commanded. He climbed up on the donkey, caught hold of the bull's tail, 
and yanked it like a bellpull. Promise? The giant's face turned purple Promise, 
he puffed.
As soon as Becan let go, the belt unwound. With a fearsome
howl, the arhach bounded over the wall and disappeared. Becan buckled on the 
giant's huge boots. Just my size he said. Then, waving the sword he led the herd 
home.

Some time later, the gentleman told Becan, Stay home with the cows today. There's 
trouble coming to the town of Kinsale. Trouble asked Becan. Tis the Day of the 
Dragon. His master shuddered. Every seven years, that wicked lizard rises from the 
ocean and swallows the fairest maiden in the land. And what if she does not care 
for that? Becan asked. Oh, she has no choice, for she'll be bound to a post. If 
she's not there, the dragon will blow the sea onto the land, wash away the village, 
and drown all the people. That is trouble indeed! cried Becan. This year the lass 
is Princess Finola, the king's own daughter. He squinted at Becan. Don't you be 
thinking of going. The crowd might crush one as small as you. Going was just what 
Becan had in mind. While his master slept, Becan put on the giant's boots and 
thrust the sword into his bull-tail belt. Then he scrambled up on the donkey and 
rode off to Kinsale.

Becan spied the king's castle first, for it was perched high on a headland above 
the blue-green sea. As he trotted down the hillside into town, Becan saw carts 
crowding the shore and a girl tied to a post at the water's edge. A band of gold 
circled her shiny black hair, and Becan knew she was Princess Finola. The scene was 
strangely silent. Only the voice of the princess was heard over the splash of the 
waves. Will no one help me? she pleaded.
People looked away from her. Some hung their heads, but none moved. I shall! cried 
Becan, sliding from the donkey. Let me sharpen my sword on that dragon. I'll Look 
behind you the princess screamed.

Becan wheeled about. The sea was bubbling, as if coming to a boil, and suddenly a 
monstrous dragon burst from the water. Flames flashed from its mouth, and its 
barbed tail churned the waves to a froth. Scales plated its body like armor, and 
the nails on its toes were sharper than daggers. Becan raised the giant's sword 
with trembling hands. Beware, Serpent he shouted, and the battle began. Ooooh 
moaned the crowd, as the dragon almost caught Becan in its claws. Bravo cried the 
princess, as Becan's sword drew blood. But the creature acted as if the strikes 
from the sword were pinpricks. By afternoon, Becan was so tired, he could hardly 
lift the blade. Grasping his belt instead, he hurled it at the dragon. The bull's 
tail wrapped itself around the fiery jaws, tying them shut. The dragon snorted and 
heaved, but each move tightened the belt. Soon only two thin streams of smoke 
curled from its nostrils. With a sizzle, the monster sank beneath the waves, taking 
the tail of the speckled bull down with it.

People cheered and rushed to Becan, almost crushing him, just as his master had 
warned. Then he heard Little Bigfoot and saw his three stepsisters ready to pounce 
on him like three cats on a mouse. Becan jumped on his donkey. Wait cried Princess 
Finola. She reached for Becan and caught him by the boot. I want to thank you! 
You're welcome, to be sure. Kicking the donkey, Becan took off down the road as if 
the dragon still chased him. And the princess was left holding his boot.

The next day, Becan took his herd to pasture, just as always. But now he had only 
one boot, his bull-tail belt was gone forever, and the tip of the giant's sword was 
bent like a fishhook. Becan dug a hole and buried the sword under an apple tree. 
That's the end of it all he said. But it wasn't. Princess Finola still had the 
other boot, and she was determined to find its owner. I'll marry the one whose foot 
fits this boot, and none other, she insisted. It was he and he alone who saved me 
from the dragon. The king sent a royal messenger to crisscross the country from sea 
to mountains with orders to find the owner of the boot. Many wished to wed the 
pretty dark-haired princess. Soldiers and sailors, fishermen and farmers, all tried 
on the shoe. Some stuffed the toe with sawdust, others used sheep's wool, and more 
than a few wore layer upon layer of thick knitted stockings. Still, the boot was 
too big for any of them. Tis giant-sized they grumbled.

A year passed before the messenger arrived at the gentleman's house. When Becan's 
master slipped on the boot it slipped right off again. Let the lad have a go at it, 
he said. A cowherd? The messenger winked at the gentleman, but he handed the boot 
to Becan. Why not? Of course, the boot fit Becan as snug as his own skin. He kicked 
up his heel, grinned at his master, and said to the astonished messenger, I've the 
mate to it in the cowshed. Soon enough, Becan was on his way to Kinsale again, 
wearing both boots and astride the gentleman's fine horse. How grand cried the 
princess when he arrived at the castle. We're just the same height, sir, so I know 
we'll see eye to eye on everything.
He grinned at her. You can call me Becan, he said, for that's what my mother named 
me. You shall be Prince Becan, said Princess Finola. She hugged him, and the lad 
blushed as red as the hair on his head.

author's note
in ireland for a thousand years a seanachaoi or storyteller was second only to a king
and irish harpers sang their ballads in every court. then in an english law the statute
of kilkenny banned bards and poets from using their native tongue. forbidden or 
forgotten few irish legends or folktales found their way into print until the the 
irish cinderlad is an adaptation of one of these old stories revived in the
nineteenth century. a cinderlad tale isn't unique to ireland. around the world there 
are many variations of the story. most familiar is the scandinavian askelad but other
european cinderlads are found in england, hungary and the balkans. india and japan
have similar tales and the hausa people of africa have a hero who is identified by
a shoe test. like his female counterpart, a male cinderella is aided by some magical
being. although a bull seems a strange fairy godmother, in long ago ireland, cattle
were thought to have come from the sea and to have unusual powers. in particular, a cow
with a white face and red ears was considered an enchanted creature. this condensed
retelling is based primarily on douglas hyde's the bracket bull four irish stories 
dublin, and on sara cone bryant's billy beg and his bull best stories to tell children
houghton mifflin co. cambridge